WIP - Onboard Managed Prometheus per stamp (#755)
Azure/Mission-Critical-Online: docs/reference-implementation/Managed-prometheus.md

> # Managed prometheus in Azure Mission-critical (preview)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Managed Prometheus in Azure Mission-critical
```

Reviewer: I wonder whether we actually should mention/call it Azure Monitor Workspace (with managed Prometheus) or something?

> **Prometheus** is an open-source monitoring solution that enables you to collect metrics from various systems, applications, and services. It allows you to query and visualize your data, alert on critical conditions, and understand the performance and behavior of your infrastructure. It is built with a focus on scalability, reliability, and simplicity, making it a popular choice for monitoring large and complex systems.

## Why Prometheus?

Azure Mission-Critical follows a cloud-native-first, PaaS-first approach. Whenever possible should PaaS and cloud-native services be prioritized when designing, developing or modernizing a workload on Azure. These cloud-native, and several PaaS services have one thing in common, they provide prometheus metrics. To call out a few examples, AKS is using Kubernetes, Kubernetes provides Prometheus metrics on various levels like the control plane and the nodes (kubelet) but also its services like cert-manager, open service mesh and nginx (and of course many more) provide prometheus metric endpoints.

> As you can see, Prometheus, Prometheus metrics and especially the Prometheus Query Language (PromQL) are a defacto standard in the cloud native space. What options do we have to leverage these metrics? The existing Azure Monitor agent already supports scraping prometheus metrics and store them in Log Analytics. This was already quiet helpful, but, Log Analytics is a quiet expensive storage and it supports Kusto Query Language (KQL) but not the Prometheus Query Language (PromQL). And this can become a problem, especially when using Prometheus across environments and platforms.

Reviewer 2: Instead of de facto standard should we call out that Prometheus an official cloud native standard (CNCF)?

Author: I cannot even remember that I wrote this text. That old is this PR already..

```suggestion
As the examples above show, Prometheus, Prometheus metrics and especially the Prometheus Query Language (PromQL) are well-established standards in the cloud native space. The existing Azure Monitor add-on for Azure Kubernetes Service already supported scraping prometheus metrics from endpoints within a cluster and stored them in Log Analytics. Azure Monitor Workspace now supports also PromQL which makes it easier to use across environments and platforms.
```

- **Data collection rules** to determine what data to collect.
- **Data collection endpoints** define the target to sent the data to for analysis and storage.
- **Data collection rule associations** to link rules and resources they apply to.

This once set up provides you with a query endpoint that can be leveraged by for example Grafana to feed dashboards.

## How to fit Prometheus into Azure Mission-Critical?

You might wonder how these additional resources are getting deployed and where to put them. The answer is easy, the mission-critical architecture pattern separates between global and regional components as well as between stateful and stateless components.

The Azure Monitor workspace that stores the collected data is getting deployed into the `<prefix>-monitoring-rg`. One instance per region used.

The other resources, like the Data collection rule, endpoint and rule association is deployed alongside the regional stamps. They're ephemeral and share the same lifecycle as the stamp. When a new stamp is getting deployed, new rules, endpoints and associations are deployed and the old ones are getting destroyed.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use this [article](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/essentials/azure-monitor-workspace-overview#data-considerations), if the mission-critical application has strong data resiliency and retention requirements for metrics data.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Should we add something about data retention? I think data retention on AzMon WS is 18 month... can we easily off load metrics to a cold storage?

Author: Please make a suggestion. I don't want to overcomplicate things here. Maybe a link to https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/essentials/azure-monitor-workspace-overview#data-considerations?

> Use this [article](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/essentials/azure-monitor-workspace-overview#data-considerations), if the mission-critical application has strong data resiliency and retention requirements for metrics data.

Author: ```suggestion
See [Data considerations in Azure Monitor workspace overview](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/essentials/azure-monitor-workspace-overview#data-considerations) for more information.
```
